Sign in with bitcoin page (#885)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin.md

{:.no_toc}

---

<div class="glossary-toc" markdown="1">
* Table of contents
{:toc}
</div>

---

Identity is at the core of bitcoin, as it is a requirement to create what we refer to as ownership. Bitcoin is assigned to addresses. Addresses are generated from public-private key pairs. Owning bitcoin means being solely in control of these private keys. See [public-key cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography)) for more information on this topic.

The cryptography involved in this can also be used to generate public keys for other purposes, like a unique identifier that websites and applications can use for their account systems. This is similar to approaches like [Passkeys](https://developer.apple.com/passkeys/), which also look at replacing email & password combos with unique identifiers. [Decentralized identities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decentralized_identifier) (DID) are another emerging approach.

In the context of bitcoin, this allows users to sign in to services with their wallets and also use this connection to make low-friction payments.

{% include tip/open.html color="blue" icon="info" label="All eyes on lightning" %}

> On this page, we only focus on lightning wallets, as they lend themselves much better to this type of user experience.

Reviewer: Curios, why is this so? Both on-chain / lightning use public-key cryptography.

Author: From a practical perspective, I can use webLN and LNURL-Auth today and I don't think any on-chain wallets do this (AFAIK). 

The other point is that lightning wallets are better for use cases around micropayments and allowances. Having to wait 10 minutes for a of payment confirmation is bit of a deal breaker. Bit of the same logic we have around the daily spending wallet.

Overall I am assuming that we will have to keep updating this page as things evolve. I heard that more webLN capabilities are bring discussed, as well as a [webBTC spec](https://balls.dev). I believe @johnsBeharry is involved in this.

{% include tip/close.html %}

> #### Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Adoption 
```
I feel like Adoption would be a more clear word to use here

{:.no_toc}

“Sign in with bitcoin” is not widely supported. It uses new technologies like [WebLN](https://webln.dev/#/) and [LNURL-auth](https://github.com/fiatjaf/lnurl-rfc/blob/luds/04.md) that are still maturing and looking for broader adoption. To try this out, you can use the [Alby](https://getalby.com/) browser extension wallet with a service like [Stacker News](https://stacker.news/) that allows you to spend satoshi to upvote news stories (more lightning apps can be found in the [bolt.fun maker directory](https://makers.bolt.fun/products)).

### Wallet-service communication

> Your service and the user wallet need to be able to communicate with each other to exchange information. There are two basic ways to handle this—direct and bridged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your service and the user's wallet need to be able to communicate with each other to exchange information. There are two basic ways to handle this—direct and bridged.
```

#### Direct communication

The smoothest user experience is when the wallet and the service can directly communicate with each other. For example, a browser wallet and a website can send messages back and forth (see [WebLN](https://www.webln.guide/introduction/readme)). This allows for convenient features like allowances for automatic approval of payments for services the user trusts.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/direct-connection.png"

>    retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/direct-connection@2x.png"

Reviewer: Wasn't clear what is going on in this picture, is this mean the user doesn't have to log in to communicate with the web app? some things that could this section clearer.

- Caption on image explaining what is going on
- An example of a direct communication app so people can go test it out themselves
- An action in the image that the user is taking

Author: This paragraph is not about specific actions. It illustrates how the wallet and the service communicate with each other. Is the text above not clear enough?

Author: I added captions to all images. Hope that clarifies the focus.

   alt-text = "Browser window with a wallet extension installed"
   width = 800
   height = 411
%}

#### Bridged communication

> There is more friction if the user needs to be involved in this communication. However, this extra friction provides more user control and better security. In the visualization below, the service and user wallet cannot directly communicate with each other. Instead, the web application presents instructions as QR codes that the user needs to scan with their (mobile) wallet. The wallet then sends instructions to the application server, which updates the web application.

Reviewer: An example app would be handy

Author: The support section above has tips for how to try this stuff out.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/bridged-connection.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/bridged-connection@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Communication flow between a browser window and a smart phone wallet"
   width = 800
   height = 411
%}

> This does not necessarily have to be done via QR code. The most basic method could even involve manually copying and pasting messages and identifiers back and forth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This does not necessarily have to be done via a QR code. The most basic method could even involve manually copying and pasting messages and identifiers back and forth.
```

## Signing in

The biggest hurdle at this stage is that most users will not be familiar with this authentication method and are not likely to have a wallet they can readily use. Ensure that there are concise explanations and tips to get users started.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/signin-info.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/signin-info@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Sign in screen with tips for wallets to use and general information"

>    width = 800

Reviewer: Are these two images representing the different types of communication (bridged and direct)? If so, stating which is which along side both image would be handy.

Author: Added caption to clarify that one is the sign-in prompt from the website and the other is the user confirming the sign-in in the wallet.

   height = 411
%}

Authentication is a simple process in which the service sends a message to the wallet. The wallet then uses cryptography to generate a unique identifier from the message, which it sends back to the service. This identifier can then be used to establish an account.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/signin-request.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/signin-request@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Browser window with a modal for approving web service authentication"
   width = 800
   height = 411
%}

Keep in mind that your service will not be able to retrieve user names, emails, balances, transactions, or other information from the wallet. Only the minimal information to identify the user is communicated. If you need to communicate with users about their accounts or activity, make sure you request an email or other contact point.

## Signing out

> Ensuring users are signed out (manually or via session time-outs) is important. The account may have payment allowances, or other problematic permissions, that could otherwise be abused by third parties.

Reviewer: An image for this would be handy.

Author: What would the image show? Doesn't seem like any unique design patterns that don't exist in any other application.

## Making payments

> A payment is typically initiated by your service when the user wants to take an action. Show the most appropriate option right away based on how the user has previously interacted with their wallet (direct or bridged, [see above]({{ '#wallet-service-communication' | relative_url }})).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, your service will prompt the user for a payment when the user tries to interact with the service. Show the most appropriate option right away based on how the user has previously used your service (direct or bridged, [see above]({{ '#wallet-service-communication' | relative_url }})).
```

- "...based on how the user has previously interacted with their wallet..." - this confused me a little bit. I think you're trying to talk about how the user perviously interacted _with the service_ (_using_ their wallet).
- "...payment is typically initiated by the service..." - This makes it sound like the service is making the payment, but I think you're trying to say that the service is essentially asking the user to make a payment.
- "...the user wants to take an action..." - Technically accurate, but sounds kind of inhuman and overly analytical.

> Typically, your service will prompt the user for a payment when the user tries to interact with the service. Show the most appropriate option right away based on how the user has previously used your service (direct or bridged, [see above]({{ '#wallet-service-communication' | relative_url }})).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, a service will prompt the user for a payment when the user tries to interact with the service. Show the most appropriate option right away based on how the user has previously used your service (direct or bridged, [see above]({{ '#wallet-service-communication' | relative_url }})).
```

How would a payment different between using direct or bridges? A visual for this would be handy. 

Same point as above, makes more sense for a how it works to talk like this.

Author: Added an image for this.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/payment-request.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/payment-request@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Browser window with a modal for confirming a payment of 100 satoshi"
   width = 800
   height = 411
%}

> Allowances allow for automatic approval of payments by wallets up to certain amounts. This reduces friction for users that frequently transact. With an allowance, the modal window in the visualization above would not be needed. Ensure your interface provides user feedback when payments are confirmed.

Reviewer: This would only be for direct yeah?

> An alternative to reducing friction for frequent payments is to let users deposit satoshi into their accounts (and later withdraw them). This puts the service into a custodial position, for the benefit of smoother payments (since they only involve database updates and not actual lightning payments).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative to reducing friction for frequent payments is to let users deposit satoshi into their accounts (and later withdraw them). This puts the service into a custodial position for the benefit of smoother payments (since they only involve database updates and not actual lightning payments).
```

## Connecting multiple wallets

> Users may migrate wallets and want to link their existing account to a new wallet. They may also want to connect multiple wallets to the same account. This could be for convenience, like signing in with both a desktop and a mobile wallet. Or it could be for security, like logging in with one wallet, but making payments with another. It may also be necessary on order to accomodate different implementations and lack of [interoperability]({{ '/guide/designing-products/interoperability/' | relative_url }})).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users may migrate wallets and want to link their existing account to a new wallet. They may also want to connect multiple wallets to the same account. This could be for convenience, like signing in with both a desktop and a mobile wallet. Or it could be for security, like logging in with one wallet but making payments with another. It may also be necessary in order to accommodate different implementations and lack of [interoperability]({{ '/guide/designing-products/interoperability/' | relative_url }})).
```

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/connected-wallets.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin/connected-wallets@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Browser window showing an account screen with a list of linked wallets"
   width = 800
   height = 411
%}

## Recovery

> If a user loses their wallet, they also lose their access to your service. Ensure you have a recovery mechanism in place. This could be a single-use recovery code (as is a common pattern with [multi-factor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication)), or a traditional email & password setup that you can also use for other communication with the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a user loses their wallet, they also lose their access to your service. Ensure you have a recovery mechanism in place. This could be a single-use recovery code (as is a common pattern with [multi-factor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication)) or a traditional email & password setup that you can also use for other communication with the user.
```

> If a user loses their wallet, they also lose their access to your service. Ensure you have a recovery mechanism in place. This could be a single-use recovery code (as is a common pattern with [multi-factor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication)) or a traditional email & password setup that you can also use for other communication with the user.

Reviewer 3: Passwords aren't needed for "Sign in with bitcoin" recovery just a verified method to communicate with the account holder. When the recovery process kicks off, you then can ask the owner of the account if it has been compromised (delete the existing keys linked to said account), or if they want to just add a new key so they can access the account.
 
```suggestion
If a user loses their wallet, they also lose their access to your service. Ensure you have a recovery mechanism in place. This could be a single-use recovery code (as is a common pattern with [multi-factor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication)) or a traditional email that you can also use for other communication with the user.
```
